Data migration and Migrating from 3.x to 4.x in Kubernetes (#1722)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/hosting/4.x/data-migration-k8s.md

---
title: "Migration from CHT 3.x to CHT 4.x in Kubernetes"
linkTitle: "K8s Data Migration to 4.x"
weight: 1

> aliases:
>   - /apps/guides/hosting/4.x/k8s-data-migration

Reviewer: Since this is an entirely new page, we don't need any aliases

```suggestion
```

description: >
  Guide to migrate existing data from CHT 3.x to CHT 4.x in Kubernetes environments
relatedContent: >
---

> The hosting architecture differs entirely between CHT-Core 3.x and CHT-Core 4.x. When both versions are running in Kubernetes, migrating data requires specific steps using the `couchdb-migration` tool. This tool interfaces with CouchDB to update shard maps and database metadata.

Reviewer: Can you add a link to the CouchDB Migration tool? That way folks can read up on it before using it.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
If after upgrading you get an error, `Cannot convert undefined or null to object` - please see [issue #8040](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/8040) for a work around. This only affects CHT 4.0.0, 4.0.1, 4.1.0 and 4.1.1. It was fixed in CHT 4.2.0.
{{% /alert %}}

## Migration Steps

> ### 1. Initial Setup

Reviewer: Please update all the numbers to use native markdown enumeration  like this:

```suggestion
1. Initial Setup
```

```shell
# Set your namespace
NAMESPACE=<your-namespace>
```

### 2. Access the Source CouchDB (3.x)
```shell
# List all pods to find medic-os pod
kubectl get pods -n $NAMESPACE

# Access the medic-os pod
kubectl exec -it -n $NAMESPACE <medic-os-pod-name> -- bash
```

### 3. Set Up Migration Tool Inside 3.x Pod

Once inside the pod, install required dependencies:
```shell

> # Install Node.js
> curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_16.x | bash -
> apt install -y nodejs
> 
> # Install npm (if not installed with Node.js)
> apt install -y npm
> 
> # Install git and clone repository
> apt update
> apt install -y git
> git clone https://github.com/medic/couchdb-migration.git
> cd couchdb-migration
> npm ci --omit=dev

Reviewer: We can tidy this up a bit:

```suggestion
# Add node apt repository and update apt
curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_16.x | bash -
apt update

# Ensure nodejs, npm and git are installed
apt install -y nodejs npm git

#  clone repository
git clone https://github.com/medic/couchdb-migration.git
cd couchdb-migration
npm ci --omit=dev
```

Reviewer 2: So we're running this code in the pod that hosts medic-os and medic-os is contantainerized within this pod or how? 
We would have node 8 installed for medic-os, does installing node 16 interfere in some way?

Reviewer 2: Also, if you `npm link`, then you can use the `bin` commands directly.

```

### 4. Run Pre-Migration Commands on 3.x

> Get credentials from 1Password and set them inside the pod:

Reviewer: Since we're in the container, we should be sure to remind them

```suggestion
While still `exec`ed in the `medic-os` container,  get credentials from 1Password and set them inside the pod:
```

```shell
export ADMIN_USER=<admin_username_from_1password>
export ADMIN_PASSWORD=<admin_password_from_1password>

# Set COUCH_URL
export COUCH_URL="http://${ADMIN_USER}:${ADMIN_PASSWORD}@localhost:5984"

# Verify connection
curl -s $COUCH_URL/_up
```

Pre-index views to minimize downtime:
```shell

> ./bin/pre-index-views <desired CHT version>

Reviewer 2: With `npm link` this would just be `pre-index-views 4.2.2`

```

{{% alert title="Note" %}} 
If pre-indexing is omitted, 4.x API will fail to respond to requests until all views are indexed. For large databases, this could take many hours or days.
{{% /alert %}}

Save CouchDB configuration:
```shell
./bin/get-env
```

Save the output containing:
- CouchDB secret (used for encrypting passwords and session tokens)
- CouchDB server UUID (used for replication checkpointing)
- CouchDB admin credentials

### 5. Clone the 3.x Data Volume

> First, identify the volume ID from your 3.x data:

Reviewer: We should remind them that they need to exist the `medic-os` container before preceeding

```shell
# Get the PVC name
kubectl get pvc -n $NAMESPACE

# Get the volume ID from the PVC
VOLUME_ID=$(kubectl get pvc <your-3x-pvc-name> -n $NAMESPACE -o jsonpath='{.spec.volumeName}')

> EBS_VOLUME_ID=$(kubectl get pv $VOLUME_ID -o jsonpath='{.spec.awsElasticBlockStore.volumeID}' | cut -d'/' -f4)

Reviewer: I think because this section is so long, it's likely having them manually set  `<your-3x-pvc-name>` to be an env var.  let's  break this out into it's own step to find the the PVC name and set the three env vars. the next larger section can then just by copy and pasted blindly

    --region eu-west-2 \
    --volume-id $EBS_VOLUME_ID \
    --description "CHT 3.x to 4.x migration snapshot" \
    --query 'SnapshotId' \
    --output text)

echo "Created snapshot: $SNAPSHOT_ID"

# Wait for the snapshot to complete
aws ec2 wait snapshot-completed --snapshot-ids $SNAPSHOT_ID

# Set cluster-specific variables
# For development:
AVAILABILITY_ZONE="eu-west-2b"
CLUSTER_NAME="dev-cht-eks"

# For production, comment out above and uncomment below:
# AVAILABILITY_ZONE="eu-west-2a"
# CLUSTER_NAME="prod-cht-eks"

# Create a new volume from the snapshot
NEW_VOLUME_ID=$(aws ec2 create-volume \
    --region eu-west-2 \
    --availability-zone $AVAILABILITY_ZONE \
    --snapshot-id $SNAPSHOT_ID \
    --volume-type gp2 \
    --query 'VolumeId' \
    --output text)

echo "Created new volume: $NEW_VOLUME_ID"

# Tag the new volume for Kubernetes use
aws ec2 create-tags \
    --resources $NEW_VOLUME_ID \
    --tags Key=kubernetes.io/cluster/$CLUSTER_NAME,Value=owned Key=KubernetesCluster,Value=$CLUSTER_NAME

# Verify your tags took effect
aws ec2 describe-volumes --region eu-west-2 --volume-id $NEW_VOLUME_ID | jq '.Volumes[0].Tags'
```

### 6. Deploy CHT 4.x with Existing Data

> Create a values.yaml file using the volume ID from the previous step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `values.yaml` file using the volume ID from the previous step:
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer: Two suggestions: let's use the updated template [here](https://github.com/medic/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/cht-chart-4x/values.yaml) and as well let's simplify it for single node.  We can then link to the larger yaml file and say, something like "use this larger one for multi-node"

combining these two suggestions will make this yaml file a lot less complex to edit and have have fewer changes need made to it
